v2: Clarification MultiModel format (#622)
PEtab-dev/PEtab: doc/v2/documentation_data_format.rst

Conditions table
----------------

The optional conditions table defines discrete changes to the simulated model. 
These (sets of) changes typically represent interventions, perturbations, or 
changes in the environment of the system of interest. These modifications are 

> referred to as experimental) *conditions*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
referred to as (experimental) *conditions*.
```

Conditions table
----------------

> The optional conditions table defines discrete changes to the simulated model.

Reviewer 2: `model` -> `model(s)`

     For further details, refer to SBML semantic test suite case `01779
     <https://github.com/sbmlteam/sbml-test-suite/blob/7ab011efe471877987b5d6dcba8cc19a6ff71254/cases/semantic/01779/01779-model.m>`_.

   * For problems involving multiple models, any assignment to targets not

>      present in the currently simulated model will be ignored.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure that will solve more problems than it creates, but fine if there are good use cases.

Author: sorry, this should have been deleted.

  Numeric values or parameter names are allowed. Same rules apply as for
  ``observableParameters`` in the previous point.

- ``modelId`` [PETAB_ID, OPTIONAL, REFERENCES(yaml.models.model_id)]

  The modelId specifies which model to simulate for each data point. modelIds
  are defined by the keys of the models dict in the PEtab problem YAML file.
  This column is required when multiple models are defined in the PEtab problem.
  For problems with a single model, this column is ignored, and the same model

>   is used for all simulations.

Author: Yes.

>   The modelId specifies which model to simulate for each data point. modelIds
>   are defined by the keys of the models dict in the PEtab problem YAML file.
>   This column is required when multiple models are defined in the PEtab problem.
>   For problems with a single model, this column is ignored, and the same model
>   is used for all simulations.
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Which model to simulate for each data point. modelIds are defined by the keys of 
  the models dict in the PEtab problem YAML file. This column is required when 
  multiple models are defined in the PEtab problem, otherwise it is ignored.
```

* ``observableFormula`` [STRING]

  Observation function as plain text formula expression.
  May contain any symbol defined any of the employed models (including model 
  time ``time``) or parameter table. In the simplest case, for SBML models, 
  just a species ID or an ``AssignmentRule`` target. Additionally, any observable ID
  introduced in the observable table may be referenced, but circular definitions
  must be avoided.

>   In problems with multiple models, symbols not defined in the currently simulated 

Reviewer 4: Should this not rather throw an error?
If I for example there is in the observable formula a specie not present in the model, it feels like an error has been made by the user.

Author: Yes, I considered that alternative. This specification allows reuse of observables across models, the user can always introduce model specific observables. We could provide different options for linting that are more or less strict.

- ``parameterId`` [PETAB_ID, REQUIRED]

  The ``parameterId`` of the parameter described in this row. This has to match

>   the ID of a parameter specified any model, a parameter introduced

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  the ID of a parameter specified at least one model, a parameter introduced
```

- ``parameterId`` [PETAB_ID, REQUIRED]

  The ``parameterId`` of the parameter described in this row. This has to match

>   the ID of a parameter specified at least one model, a parameter introduced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the ID of a parameter specified in at least one model, a parameter introduced
```

Parameter estimation problems combining multiple models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Purpose
+++++++

PEtab supports defining multiple models within a single problem specification. This
feature is designed to enable users to define experiment-specific model variants or
submodels. Rather than implementing a single global, parameterized model, users can
define multiple smaller, self-contained models that differ structurally as needed.

This approach offers several benefits:

- Simplified model definition for users, as each variant can be independently
  specified.
- Improved simulation performance for tool developers, as smaller models can be
  simulated more efficiently.

Scope and Application
+++++++++++++++++++++

While multiple models are intended to be applied to different experiments, model
selection is specified at the level of individual data points in the
:ref:`v2_measurements_table`. This design enables:

- Reuse of experiments across models.
- Fine-grained model-to-data assignment.

With the exception of the :ref:`v2_measurements_table`, all other PEtab tables apply
uniformly to all models.

This design has several implications:

> - A single experiment may require simulations using multiple models.

Author: > I find this potentially confusing. The message is that a given experiment may have to be simulated (completely) once with model A and once with model B in order to evaluate the objective function, but not that period 1 of a given experiment is simulated with model A, and period 2 is simulated with model B, right?

correct.

> - A single experiment may require simulations using multiple models.

Reviewer 3: I'd specifically add that this is decided based on the measurements.

"A single experiment may need to be simulated with different models for different measurements. However, a single simulation of a given experiment is always performed using one single model."?

- ``modelEntityId`` [STRING or empty, REQUIRED]

  A globally unique identifier defined in any model, or empty if the entity is

>   not present any model. This does not have to be a valid PEtab identifier.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  not present in any model. This does not have to be a valid PEtab identifier.
```

This approach offers several benefits:

- Simplified model definition for users, as each variant can be independently
  specified.
- Improved simulation performance for tool developers, as smaller models can be
  simulated more efficiently.

Scope and Application
+++++++++++++++++++++

While multiple models are intended to be applied to different experiments, model
selection is specified at the level of individual data points in the
:ref:`v2_measurements_table`. This design enables:

- Reuse of experiments across models.
- Fine-grained model-to-data assignment.

With the exception of the :ref:`v2_measurements_table`, all other PEtab tables apply
uniformly to all models.

This design has several implications:

- A single experiment may need to be simulated with different models for
  different measurements.
  However, a single simulation of a given experiment is always performed
  using one single model
- Each model may be associated with a distinct subset of experiments.
- The number of conditions to be simulated for a model-specific instance
  of an experiment may vary across models.
- Each parameter defined in the :ref:`v2_parameters_table` has a shared value

>   across all models.

Reviewer: Thanks, B sounds fine to me too. This is like how a model component can take different values across conditions. In v1, a simulation is a unique combination of (preequilibration condition, simulation condition). In v2, it will be a unique combination of (experiment, model). Parameter/state variable values may differ between simulations in v2, due to differences in the experiment or model.

>   across all models.

Reviewer 3: Agreed, B sounds most reasonable.

C would be a bit weird. It would be illegal to have a constant SBML parameter with different values in different models, but it would be fine to have a constant SBML species with different values in different models.

selection is specified at the level of individual data points in the
:ref:`v2_measurements_table`. This design enables:

- Reuse of experiments across models.
- Fine-grained model-to-data assignment.

With the exception of the :ref:`v2_measurements_table`, all other PEtab tables apply 
to all models. Parameters listed in the parameter table are defined globally and 
shared across all models. In contrast, entries in all other tables implicitly define
model-specific instances of observables, conditions, experiments, etc., with their 
respective PEtab IDs existing in local, model-specific namespaces. Each PEtab 
subproblem defined in this way must constitute a valid PEtab problem on its own.

This design has several implications:

- A single experiment may need to be simulated with different models for
  different measurements. However, a single simulation of a given experiment
  is always performed using one single model.
- Each model may be associated with a distinct subset of experiments.
- The number of conditions to be simulated for a model-specific instance
  of an experiment may vary across models.

> - Each parameter defined in the :ref:`v2_parameters_table` has a shared value

Reviewer 4: Worth to mention that we can achieve model specific parameters via using the condition table (we can map parameter k_m1, k_m2 to k in the condition table, where k then can set different values in different models)

Reviewer 4: I am not 100% sure users not experienced with PEtab will make the connection they can use the condition table to assign model specific values for a SBML model parameters, e.g. k1, via the condition table. This is also just a suggestion, which if you do not think is needed, can be ignored.

Reviewer 4: I think that is an excellent point that would help users create more tricky PEtab setups (we should probably open a separate issue for this)!

Parameter estimation problems combining multiple models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Parameter estimation problems can involve multiple models, with a specific model
assigned to each individual data point. However, all tables in a PEtab problem apply
uniformly to all models. As a result:
- Multiple models may need to be simulated for a single experiment.
- Each model may be simulated for a distinct subset of experiments.
- The number of conditions that must be simulated for an experiment may vary depending 
  on the model used.

> - Each parameter in the parameter table hase the same value across all models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Each parameter in the parameter table has the same value across all models.
```

define multiple smaller, self-contained models that differ structurally as needed.

This approach offers several benefits:

- Simplified model definition for users, as each variant can be independently 
specified.
- Improved simulation performance for tool developers, as smaller models can be 
simulated more efficiently.

Scope and Application
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
While multiple models are intended to be applied to different experiments, model
selection is specified at the level of individual data points in the 
:ref:`v2_measurements_table`. This design enables:

- Reuse of experiments across models.
- Fine-grained model-to-data assignment.

With the exception of the :ref:`v2_measurements_table`, all other PEtab tables apply
uniformly to all models.

This design has several implications:

- A single experiment may require simulations using multiple models.
- Each model may be associated with a distinct subset of experiments.
- The number of conditions to be simulated for a model-specific instance
of an experiment may vary across models.
- Each parameter defined in the :ref:`v2_parameters_table` has a shared value across all 
models.

Validation Rules
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> For any given model Only those experiments and observables that appear in the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For any given model, only those experiments and observables that appear in the 
```
